1. INTRODUCTION.
 Data mining is the analysis step of the knowledge discovery in databases process, and it is the process of discovering novel and potentially useful information and patterns from large data sets. There are different data mining technologies lying at the intersection of artiﬁcial intelligence, machine learning, statistics and database systems. The goal of data mining is to extract useful and previously unknown information out of large complex data collections. Data mining techniques have been applied to many other ﬁelds. In the context of educational research, educational data mining refers to developing methods for exploring the unique types of data that come from educational settings, and using existing data mining or developing new methods to better diagnose students’ performance and design tests that better suits students. Students’ response data contain the responses of students to a set of test questions. It can be used to determine the knowledge of a student has learned, and it can also be used to discover the relationship between the test items latent or underlying attributes. Such relationship may take the form of attempting to ﬁnd out which variables are most strongly associated with a single variable of particular interest, or may take the form of attempting to discover which relationships between any two variables are strongest. Students’ response data are beneﬁcial to both test developers and course instructors. Students’ response data contains valuable information that can be used to improve the effectiveness of test items, and for course instructors, students’ performance on the test is importance to instructors for the guidance and improvement of teaching. 
 2. INFORMATION THEORY BASED METHOD.
 In the information theory, the main concept is entropy. It is deﬁned to measure the expected uncertainty or the amount of information provided by a certain event. We feel more surprised when an unlikely event happens than a likely one occurs. One useful measure of the extent of surprise of an event is to use the logistic function. Suppose the probability of an event happening is p, then the extent of surprise of such event can be deﬁned as −logk p, in which k refers to the base of the logistic function. From this deﬁnition, it can be seen that the less the probability is, the higher the amount of information the event would provide. Given the example of students’ response data, items that have been answered correctly by a small portion of students contains much more useful information for course instructors than the items that have been answered fully correct. We adopt the conditional entropy to measure the mutual information, which is a distance metric. Deﬁnition 1 (Mutual Information Measure). The mutual information measure with regard to two random variables A and B is deﬁned as: 
 FORMULA_(1).
 Mutual information measure is a measure of how independent are the two random variables when the value of each random variable is known. Two events A and B are independent if and only if their mutual information measure achieves the maximum H(A) + H(B). Therefore, the less the value of the mutual information measure is, the more dependent the two random variables are. According to this measure, A is said to be more dependent on B than C, if M I(A, B) ≤ M I(A, C). 
 2.1 Finding the Best Dependency Tree.
 Dependency tree was introduced by Chow and Liu [1] and it has been used in ﬁnding dependency structure in the features which improve the classiﬁcation accuracy of the Bayes network classiﬁers [3]. [2] used the dependency tree to represent a set of frequent patterns, which can be used to summarize patterns into few proﬁles. [4] presented a large node dependency tree, in which the nodes are subsets of variables of dataset. The large node dependency tree is applied to density estimation and classiﬁcation. 
 Figure 1: Comparisons between mutual independency measure and the correlations. 
 2.2 Extensions.
 The method described in the paper can be easily extended to be capable of handling two item sets, each of which consists of different items. This extension is useful in the sense that it could provide the dependency relationship in a higher level and the extended method is able to generate the dependency between different sub-strands, which makes entropy-based dependency method superior to the traditional correlation method. The generated best dependency tree could be used to determine dimensions and sub-dimensions of the data. This can be done by summarizing patterns from the best dependency tree. 
 3. SIMULATION RESULTS.
 In this study, we compare the strength of the correlation against the mutual information measure between two variables. In general, the more independent two variables are, the more related two variables should be. In this sets of experiments, we graph the relationship between mutual independency measure and the correlation of two test items. Figure 1 shows the relationship between the mutual independency measure and the correlations. Figure 1(a) plots the relationship among items in a short test, Figure 1(b) plots the relationship among items in a medium test, and Figure 1(c) plots the relationship among items in a long test. From Figure 1(a), since 5 items are included in the simulated data, the number of 2-item combinations are C5 = 5x4 = 10, for Figure 1(b), 20 items will produce C20 = 2 = 190 different combinations of 2-item sets, and for Figure 1(c), there are C50 = 50x49 = 1225 combinations for 50 items. From all ﬁgures, it can be seen that the slopes of the regression line are negative, which conﬁrms the fact that the more the mutual independency between two variables, the less correlated they are. The R2 of the regression line is the indication of how strong the linear relationship is. In all cases, the values of R2 are greater than 0.65, and in Figure 1(a), the R2 indicates a strong linear relationship, while that relationship is stronger in Figure 1(b) and Figure 1(c). Figure 2 displays the best dependency tree structure calculated from the simulated data1 and data2. There are two patterns {Q1, Q3, Q4}, {Q2, Q5}) observed from Figure 2(a) and in Figure 2(b), all the questions are highly dependent on Q13. 
 Figure 2: The dependency tree structures of two tests. 
 4. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK.
 In this paper, we apply the concept of entropy to propose a distance metric to evaluate the amount of mutual information among records in students’ response data, and propose a method of constructing dependency tree from the data. The experimental results conﬁrm the effectiveness and efficiency of the proposed method. There are some potential work on the research agenda. First, the information theory based method presented in this paper ﬁnds the dependent item pairs, and it can be extended to calculate the dependency between item sets. Second, the simulation results conducted in this paper are on synthetic data, and applying to real students’ response data is necessary.