1. Number of students attempting self-tests in 2 courses. Left: foundation of computer science , right: Java 
 We are  interested  in  investigating  this  pattern  to  uncover  the strategy  adopted by students: Are they gradually giving up completely, which means that the students who attempt the self-test of week i  is roughly a sub-group of the students who attempted the self-test of week i-1? Or are they eclectic in their choice, which means students attempt randomly  some  self-tests  during  the  semester  though  they  attempt  them  less  as  the semester  progresses?   We suggest  investigating  this  pattern  with the  help of  specific association rules. First we propose to extract local rules of the form ii XX →+ 1 which mean  the  following:  If  students  attempt  self-test  i+1,  then  they  also  attempted  the preceding one. High confidence of these rules denotes that the students who attempt self- test i+1 form almost a subgroup of those who attempted the preceding self-test, since we are in the context in which more students have attempted self-test i than self-test  i+1. When confidence of these local rules is high we propose to go ahead extracting global rules  of  the  form 111 ,...,, XXXX iii −+ → ,  which  mean  the  following:  If  students attempt self-test i+1, then they also attempted all the preceding ones. High confidence of these rules denotes the emergence of a core group that keeps attempting the self-tests. Support of these specific rules is not relevant. It could be low leading to the discovery of rare association rules [KohRountree]. 
 Fig. 2. Support and confidence of local rules. 
 Figure  2 shows support  and confidence of local  association rules.  2→1 means if students attempt the second self-test, they attempt the first one. One notices at a glance that support for both courses keeps decreasing as expected. Confidence is high for the Java  course  suggesting  the  emergence  of  a  core  group,  which  is  less  true  for  the foundation course. Local rules of the Java course have been rated as interesting by three other  measures  of  interestingness.  Confidence  of  the  global  rules  for  the  foundation course is low while it is mainly above 0.6 for the Java course.  Students have adopted different strategies in these two courses. Local and global association rules can be used for any kind of resources when usage over time indicates a drop similar to  the one of Figure 1.