1. INTRODUCTION.
 Understanding how students learn is an important issue in college education [14; 15]. Perhaps, the most common methods to be used to understand learning of college students were both interviews [14] and self-reporting measurements such as Learning and Study Strategies Inventory (LASSI) [20] or Motivated Strategies for Learning Questionnaire (MSLQ) [15]. Recently, however, researchers agreed upon the importance of alternative methods to understand students’ learning [21; 24]. Concept maps which are visual representations of knowledge are used in educational contexts, as a way to represent students’ knowledge, and identify mental models of students [13]. It includes concepts, usually enclosed in circles or boxes of some type, and relationships between concepts indicated by a connecting line that links two concepts [12]. Figure 1 shows an example of concept map. The map depicts the way a student studies or prepares for an exam. Using nodes and links, students can visualize their ideas and understanding of the content. Because the concept maps represent students’ mental models of content and their ways of problem solving, concept mapping has been widely used in teaching and learning process in academia ranging from K-12 to higher education [7; 11]. Although concept mapping is a powerful tool, there is a limitation of using concept mapping due to its difficulty to evaluate the concept maps. The most common method to evaluate students’ concept maps in educational setting might be using rubrics; however, this also has limitations. First, although educators may have a general understanding of their students’ mental models from using rubrics, educators are not provided speciﬁc and detailed information about the relationships among the concepts. Second, although rubrics reduce the amount of time educators spend evaluating concept maps, evaluation is still very time-consuming using the concept maps, particularly, in a large classroom where students number over 50. Third, when using rubrics, evaluation may not be easy for the educators to determine certain patterns of the students’ mental models. Each person’s concept map will look diﬀerently, although they may have similar patterns. Consequently, there is a strong need of computerized methods to evaluate students’ concept maps. In educational science, Yin et al. [23] examined the equivalence of two construct-a-concept-map techniques: constructa-map with created linking phrases and construct-a-map with selected linking phrases. Some works [10; 18] explored diﬀerent scoring systems for concept maps. In educational engineering, several studies [5; 19; 4] describe the construction of concept maps. Alves et al. [2] presents a system called TextStorm, which extracts raw concept maps from text. Shen et al. [16] works on the automatic generation of concept maps through text mining techniques. These studies concern the generation of concept maps rather than the analysis of concept maps. Data mining is the process of automatically extracting new and useful knowledge hidden in large datasets. Performing data mining on concept maps can provide useful information in understanding the thought processes which generate them. In this study, we explore the feasibility of the analysis of concept maps using data mining methods, and investigate the possibility of using concept maps as a research tool to understand college student’s learning. 
 Figure 1: An example of concept map. 
 2. DATA COLLECTION.
 We ﬁrst describe participants in this study, concepts provided to them, and data collection procedure. 
 2.1 Participants.
 Data were collected from 10 college Critical Inquiry (CI) courses designed to help underprepared students to either acquire study skills or efficacy/motivation. The CI courses was chosen due to the large enrollment members, of approximately 300 students per semester, and they provide speciﬁc learning contexts through pairing the CI courses with other subject courses such as psychology, chemistry, biology, education, and archeology. The primary purpose of pairing the CI courses with other subjects courses is to facilitate student to learn better in a speciﬁc subject area. A total of 111 students participated in the study by drawing their concept maps. Based on the information students provided, 58 students were females, most students were Caucasian (n=83), and most students were freshmen (n=94). 
 2.2 Concepts.
 A total of 112 concepts were designed for this study. We reviewed the concepts with the two instructors who taught the study skill course. The 112 concepts consist of seven categories including classroom learning (e.g., listening, reading, or discussion, total 41 concepts), action for study (e.g., self-explanation, annotations, or memorization, total 18 concepts), learning tools (e.g., notes, charts, or textbooks, total 22 concepts), internal trigger (e.g., inquiry, curiosity, or creativity, total 4 concepts), motivation (e.g., will, conﬁdence, or inspire, total 12 concepts), school facilities (e.g., library, web, or writing center, total 7 concepts), or people (e.g., teacher, classmate, or parent, total 8 concepts). 
 2.3 Procedures.
 Two weeks after mid-term exam week, we visited each class and administered the concept maps to students. In each class, we provided a 10-minute orientation about concept maps and drew one map for students on a whiteboard as a demonstration. Students were asked to respond to the question “how do you learn in a college class?”. They drew their concept maps with pen and pencil since the class room was a regular class room that didn’t have computers for individual students. 
 3. CONCEPT MAP MINING.
 Through discussions with education researchers, we listed their interesting queries to the students’ concept maps. In this work, we focused on two problems: “Which concepts are frequently used in students’ concept maps?” and “Which sub concept structures are commonly observed in students’ concept maps?”. For answering the ﬁrst question, we conducted frequent item set mining task [1] to the concept map data, and for the second question, we used sub-graph mining task [9]. 
 3.1 Data preprocess.
 Figure 2: Input data formats for data mining. 
 After collecting students’ hand-drawn concept maps, we digitalized them. Concept maps can be represented by graphs, consisting of nodes( or vertices), which represent concepts, and arcs( or edges), which represent relationships between the concepts. In the graphs of concept maps, vertices should have labels associated with them. Edges may have associated labels and directions represented by arrows. Vertices and edges may have their own weighted value to designate their signiﬁcance. Although a list of predeﬁned concept names and relationship names were provided, students misspelled some names or gave wrong concept and relationship names diﬀerent from the predeﬁned names. We also noticed, that in several instances synonyms or plurals of the same word were used as labels, and that some students did not follow a standard in the labeling of nodes and edges or in the use of arrows to denote direction on the edges. Our digitalization process checked all inconsistent concept names and relationship names in the concept maps. 
 3.2 Frequent association concept mining.
 In order to ﬁnd common concepts students have used for their concept maps, we applied a methodology known as association analysis to the concept data. Association analysis task in data mining is useful for discovering interesting relationships hidden in large data sets. The uncovered relationships are represented in the form of association rules or a sets of frequent items [17; 1]. For example, a frequent item set, {Lectures, Notes} suggests that a strong relationship exists between lecture and note in learning strategy. The frequency of the associated items is often measured with support. The support of an item-set x is deﬁned as the fraction of all transactions that contain x, i.e., s(x)= sc(x) , where N is the total number of transactions, and sc(x) is the support count of x, sc(x) =|{ti |x ⊆ ti , ti ∈ T }|. If the support of item-set x is greater than a given support threshold, x is called a frequent item-set. For the association analysis, data should be prepared with transaction data format. We transformed our digitalized concept map data to concept transaction data as shown in Figure 2 (a). Each row in this table corresponds to a transaction that contains a unique identiﬁer labeled TID, and a set of concepts used by a student in drawing his/her concept map. Here, a relationship between two concepts is not included in the transaction. There are many algorithms for association analysis [1; 3; 17]. We used Apriori algorithm [1] for our analysis. Four diﬀerent minimum frequency thresholds 30%, 40%, 50% and 60% were used. 
 3.3 Frequent sub-concept map mining.
 The second analysis is performed in order to derive a set of common sub structures among the collection of concept graph data. We applied frequent sub-graph mining task [17; 6] to our concept map data. Each concept map can be represented as a graph data as shown in Figure 2 (a). A concept graph G = (V, E) is composed of a concept vertex set V and a set of edges E connecting between pairs of vertices. A graph G′ = (V ′ , E ′ ) is a sub-graph of another graph G = (V, E) if its concept vertex set V ′ is a subset of V and its edge set E ′ is a subset of E. The frequency of a sub-graph is also measured by support. The support for a sub-graph g is deﬁned as the fraction of all graphs that contain g as its sub-graph, i.e., s(g)= sc(g) , where GD is a |GD| collection of graphs, and sc(g) is the support count of g, i.e, sc(g)=|{Gi |g ⊆ Gi , Gi ∈ GD}|. Sub-graphs (sub-concept map structures) g such that s(g) ≥ minsup are frequent sub-graphs. There are several algorithms for frequent subgraph mining such as FSG [9], gSpan [22] and SPIN [8]. We fed the concept graph data to the FSG algorithm [9]. Figure 2 (b) shows an example of input data format for the FSG algorithm. The required order for a valid graph data begins with ‘t’ followed by all vertexes in the graph and ﬁnally by all the edges. Three diﬀerent frequency thresholds, 10%, 20% and 30% were used for our analysis. 
 4. RESULTS.
 107 concept maps among 111 maps were analyzed. Four concepts maps were deleted because the concepts were not recognizable or students did not follow the instructions. Given the 112 concepts, a total number of 110 concepts were used. The maximum number of concepts and lines a student used were 39 and 31 respectively in each concept map, and the average concepts and lines students used were 13 and 14 respectively. Given 112 concepts, only 15 concepts: ‘teachers’, ‘me’, ‘notes’, ‘lectures’, ‘time’, ‘repetition’, ‘textbooks’, ‘listening’, ‘ﬂashcard’, ‘parents’, ‘reading’, ‘annotation’, ‘study’, ‘tutor’ and ‘activity’ concepts are used by students with 30% frequency. Among association patterns having two concepts, {teachers, me}, {teachers, notes} and {me, notes} showed very high frequency of over 60%. Among patterns having three concepts, {teachers, me, time}, {teachers, lectures, repetition} and {teachers, textbooks, repetition} showed over 50% frequency. Two concept sets having four items, {teachers, lectures, repetition, time} and {teachers, textbooks, repetition, time} showed around 30% frequency. In the sub-graph mining, the size of the patterns is measured by the number of edges. Table 1 shows sub-concept map structures with at least 10% frequency. When the threshold was set to 30%, three types of frequent sub-concept map patterns were found such as “me-listening”(sc = 34 out of 107), “teacher-lectures”(sc = 44), and “me-notes”(sc = 49). When the threshold comes to 20%, a total of 15 frequent sub-concept map structures were observed. Among them, 12 sub-graph structures were about ‘me’ strategies or actions, 2 sub-graphs were about ‘teacher’ related patterns, and 1 sub-graph was between me and teacher. Last, when the threshold was 10%, a total of 47 simple sub-graphs were discovered where 36 sub-graphs were ‘me’ initiated concepts, 6 sub-graphs were ‘teacher’ related concepts, 5 sub-graphs explain between teacher and me, with one or more of the other elements. 
 5. DISCUSSION.
 In this study, it was found that most students learn through ‘me’ initiated behaviors (e.g., “me-listening” or “me-ask”) or using learning tools (e.g., “me-notes” or “me-textbooks”). Learning through active interaction with teachers or peers was not observed. This indicates that early level college students focus on individual learning rather than learning through interaction with others. It may also reﬂect lecture oriented college courses. However, readers should consider that too many concepts given to students may have resulted in difficulty identifying patterns between students and others. From this initial research, we found both possibilities and challenges when using concept maps in this capacity in an educational context. First, when used with data mining techniques, concept maps can be useful to interpret large sets of concept maps. 
 Table 1: Frequent sub concept map patterns.
 As can be seen in our data analysis, when using diﬀerent thresholds, we were able to ﬁnd certain patterns of students’ learning in a college classroom. Although most of the patterns were simple such as “me-listening” or “me-annotations”, this does not mean the concept mapping was an ineﬀective method to capture sophisticated pictures of students’ learning. The simple patterns can be attributable to the large list of 112 predesigned concepts. Because students had too many choices, students’ concept maps became very diverse. However, through this initial phase of study, we were able to ﬁnd the most frequently referenced concepts for future study. With limiting the number of concepts, e.g., 30 concepts, we may be able to ﬁnd more detailed pictures of college students’ learning. In our future study, we will compare and contrast patterns of concept maps to students’ self-report motivation or metacognition. For example, we can divide students into several groups based on their self-report questionnaires, and then compare how the patterns of concept maps are similar or diﬀerent between groups. We are also planning to use students’ ﬁnal grades as a way to validate the patterns of learning. The study will be appealing to those who are interested in concept maps as an alternative tool for research as well as data mining in education.