1. INTRODUCTION.
 During the last two decades, advances in information technologies, and particularly the evolution of the Internet and the World Wide Web have changed dramatically the way we live, interact, and learn. New ways of social interaction and participation have been heavily influenced by the appearance of different web-based and mobile technologies; especially social web applications (such as Facebook, YouTube, and so on). These platforms provide stimulating and interactive channels of communication that foster the creation and exchange of user-generated content for learning. Learning, understood as a social process of progressive knowledge acquisition, is shaped by individuals and their interaction with others who can contribute new ideas, opinions and experiences [44]. Thus, social networks within which people interact play an important role in the learning process by expanding the possibilities of learners to reach new sources of information, and by providing (latent and potential) channels for open collaboration among individuals [22, 24]. Despite the attractive advantages presented by scholars about the impact of technology in the learning process, there is still a lack of understanding of the dynamics of social interaction within learning communities. Therefore, the motivating questions that inspire this study are (i) Is there an interplay between social networks, learning and performance? (ii) If so, what is the role of social learning in the inherent relationship between properties of social networks and performance? (iii) how does one quantify and measure learning within a social context? (iv) how does one account for social network properties of structure, relations and position in modeling learning for the purpose of learning analytics? In this exploratory study, we develop a theoretical model based on social learning and social network theories to understand how knowledge professionals engage in learning and performance, both as individuals and as groups. The study also focuses on how an individual’s levels of participation and depth of engagement in the learning process are impacted by social interactions. The following section conducts a review of relevant learning theories and social network theories to arrive at a social networks model for understanding learning and performance. The model is then tested within an eLearning domain as described in section 3. Section 4 discusses the findings of the study followed by a discussion of the results in light of theory in section 5. Implications of the study, limitations and avenue for future research are provided in the conclusion in section 6. 
 2. CONCEPTUAL FOUNDATIONS.
 There are many different theories describing the general aspects and perspectives of human learning [2, 9, 18, 26, 27, 32, 37, 41, 47, 49-51]. However, there is no single theory that can explain by itself how people learn. The generally consensus tends to describe learning as a highly complex process, which involves cognitive, affective, individual and social dimensions [48]. In formal settings, learning takes place in controlled environments where educational bodies are restricted by their curricular structure, programs design, internal policies, resources and student demand [48]. However, learning is also a result of human interactions in informal activities related to work, family, or leisure, where there are no constrains for information exchange and collaboration. To this end, social learning theory suggests that individuals learn through the observation of different situations in a social context, and they change their behavior as influenced by those they observe [2]. This aligns with experiential learning where individuals explore and adapt according with their personal needs. Therefore, in knowledge intensive environments, to whom an individual is connected is critical for reaching resources and for obtaining information in order to solve determined necessities [14]. Social interaction enables the formation and maintenance of relationships with a specific purpose. Through those relations, individuals can obtain mutual benefits and create opportunities in the short and long term [15]. The value that individuals and groups ascribe to their contacts and relationships is instrumental in to maximizing the learning outcomes. However, beyond social interaction, there are fundamental contextual factors that facilitate learning [32] in a dynamic process that involves the exploitation of human and non-human resources in order to create and develop knowledge [46]. These concepts are discussed further below. 
 2.1 Models of Learning.
 People have a predisposition to imitate past behavior of others and the consequences of their actions [31]. Each individual is free to decide which alternative is better for his or her reality in order to solve a given problem. However, analyzing options is a time consuming process, and as a consequence, people have a tendency to rely on the information provided by others. This notion of social influence is core to Situated Learning theory [32], which states that apart from the influence of human interaction, there are contextual factors that impact on the individuals’ learning process. 
 2.1.1 Situated Learning.
 The principles of contextual cognitive development were first introduced by Lev Vygotsky [50]. In his work he argues that individual development cannot be understood without referring to the sociological and contextual aspects within which such development is embedded. Lave and Wenger [32] built on Vygotsky’s theory to describe the basis of their Situated Learning Theory (SLT). SLT argues that learning takes place in highly social situations where individuals develop skills by interacting with others that can provide them with insights about existing knowledge and previous personal experiences within a “community of practice”. Wenger [52] suggests that there are three fundamental factors that constitute a community of practice: (1) a shared domain of interest, (2) mutual engagement within the community, and (3) a common set of resources, practices and beliefs. According to this notion, human relations are based on the mutual interest of two or more individuals that interact in many different ways in order to acquire and share knowledge. Lave and Wenger [32] argue that knowledge is acquired in a context that normally involves the practical use of that knowledge, in what we commonly know as “learn by doing”. Thus, social interactions play a fundamental role in order to involve learners in a community that has a determined behavior and beliefs. Lave and Wenger [32] introduced the concept of Legitimate Peripheral Participation to describe the process through which a new learner that becomes part of the community, moves from the periphery to a more central position in the group by getting more and more engaged on the knowledge creation and sharing processes. As a result of this participative evolution and the progressive accumulation of different competencies, the learner creates a reputation in the community through social interactions and eventually becomes a referent of the group assuming a more leading role as a subject matter expert. Since the definition of its principles, SLT has been the focus of an important number of studies that provide well-documented evidence of cognitive phenomena that have not fully covered for other learning theories. However, the arguments of the theory have been criticized by some scholars arguing that “while cognition is partly context-dependent, it is also context independent; while there are dramatic failures of transfer, there are also dramatic successes; while concrete instruction helps, abstract instruction also helps; and while some performances benefit from training context, others do not” [1]. Apart from these limitations, some others state that situated learning programs are often very time-consuming to develop, they require the active participation of the learner who must be motivated enough to learn, and while situated learning may be an interesting option for some learning scenarios, it is not the most efficient methodology for teaching abstract subjects that involve more complex contents and information [35]. At the same time these limitations are opportunities to go beyond and look for a deeper understanding of the social dynamics that influence learning and learners’ performance through the study of individual and group social networks. In enabling situated learning, social technologies in particular have great potential and educational value due to their inherent capacity to increase learners’ motivation and engagement through participation and knowledge creation [22]. Due to its notion of community, SLT presents an interesting perspective to analyze learning and performance from a social networks point of view. Despite the fact that the theory has been based on contextual and cultural factors that influence learning, it does not consider non-relational sources of information (e.g. databases, webservers, blogs, wikis, discussion forums, and so on) as inputs for knowledge creation. The capacity to establish connections among different human and non-human sources of information to create knowledge is one of the principles of connectivism [46]. 
 2.1.2 Connectivism.
 Siemens’ concept of Connectivism [46] argues that existing learning theories (e.g. behaviorism, cognitivism, and social constructivism) do not provide an adequate explanation for the new characteristics of learning. At a glance, behaviorism provides instructors with insights and information that can be used to manipulate the learning environment, and then stimulate certain behavior to promote learning among students. On the other hand, cognitivism focuses on the study of the inner mechanisms of the human mind and the various processes involved in knowledge acquisition. For its part, social constructivism states that individuals’ learning process is directly affected by social interactions and builds on personal experiences and beliefs [3]. By incorporating ideas from chaos, social networks and complexity theories, connectivism tries to explain the dynamics of learning and how knowledge is permanently affected for new conditions (and new knowledge) in the environment [46]. Siemens [46] describes connectivism through eight principles: “(1) Learning and knowledge rests in diversity of opinions; (2) Learning is a process of connecting specialized nodes or information sources; (3) Learning may reside in non-human appliances; (4) Capacity to know more is more critical than what is currently known; (5) Nurturing and maintaining connections is needed to facilitate continual learning; (6) Ability to see connections between fields, ideas, and concepts is a core skill; (7) Currency (accurate, up-to-date knowledge) is the intent of all connectivist learning activities; (8) Decision-making is itself a learning process. Choosing what to learn and the meaning of incoming information is seen through the lens of a shifting reality. While there is a right answer now, it may be wrong tomorrow due to alterations in the information climate affecting the decision”. The status of theory assigned by some scholars to connectivism has been criticized by others [28]. However, despite such arguments, the constructs over which connectivism is conceptualized are worth studying given the scope and research questions of the study. The principles of connectivism are aligned with situated learning theory through the concept of communities of practice. In times where knowledge is considered a central stone of the society, individuals are required to work continually on their self-actualization processes where the potentials of connections cannot be longer dismissed [40]. According to Siemens [46], “learning is a process that occur within nebulous environments of shifting core elements not entirely under the control of the individual. Learning defined as knowledge patterns on which we can act, can reside outside ourselves (within an organization or a database), is focused on connecting specialized information sets”. Consequently, connectivism can be also described as the application of the dynamic properties of social networks to learning and knowledge acquisition. The role of network technologies and the quality of connections within these networks, is critical for a connectivist-oriented analysis. However, the importance of the quality of dialogues has been just partially covered by the connectivist literature. In his article Ravenscroft [42] presents an interesting perspective of how connectivism can benefit from prior social constructivist theories by focusing on dialogues. Ravenscroft centers his attention on how dialogues support the development and exploitation of connections for enhancing the learning experience. The Social Web [43] is based on the open participation of individuals and groups, with dialogues being the mean through which communities create knowledge. In his work, Siemens [46] remarks the importance of redesigning educational programs in order to improve reasoning, and critical thinking skills among learners towards a more meaningful collaboration in social environments. The importance that Ravenscroft [42] assigns to dialogue as a source of knowledge creation, is fundamental for this study. By understanding dialogue as unit of social interaction is possible to conduct an analysis of how network connections and meaningful content interchange influence individuals’ learning process, and consequently, their overall performance improvements. 
 2.2 Understanding Learning and Performance through Social Networks.
 Social network analysis (SNA) enables the study of social systems from a structural perspective through the identification of behavioral patterns based on node and tie attributes [17]. One of the fundamental principles leading the studies about the relationship among learning, performance and social networks is that an individual’s social structure can influence an individual’s access to valuable resources [5, 8, 14, 25, 33]. Those resources are rich on new information and knowledge, and depending on the level of engagement of the individual, this can be translated into considerable improvements in performance and learning [12, 13]. Some scholars have performed empirical studies in order to provide a better understanding of the role of social learning in individual, team and organizational performance. In Cross et al. [16], social networks analysis (SNA) was used to determine the information flow among top level executives in an organization. Using some of those findings, Borgatti and Cross [6] defined a formal model to explain social behavior during the learning process and the importance of relations to facilitate the search of information. Hence, it is interesting to examine theories that explain how information is disseminated through networks, and how network structures are conducive to learning and performance. 
 2.2.1 Strength of Weak Ties Theory.
 Perhaps one of the most seminal work in information diffusion is the classical paper of Granovetter on the strength of weak ties [21]. Considering strength of a tie as “a combination of the amount of time, the emotional intensity, the intimacy (mutual confiding), and the reciprocal services which characterize the tie”, he interviewed his research subjects focusing on how they found jobs by relying on either strong or weak ties..The remarkable finding was that most of the subjects reported finding a job not through strong ties (family or friends) but rather through weak ties (recent acquaintances). Granovetter rationalized that as individuals connect with closely knit groups bound together by strong ties (that is, the denser the network becomes) information quickly becomes redundant. New information therefore must come from weak ties, which connects one to new groups of people. More formally, Granovetter considers a bridge as the unique path that provides connectivity between two separated parts of the network where “all the bridges are weak ties”. These structural bridges in social networks are the only alternative for some contacts to reach determined information resources held by members in other areas of the structure. The importance of weak ties is that more people and resources are accessible through them. 
 2.2.2 Structural Holes Theory.
 In a network structural and positional perspective (as opposed to Granovetter’s relational view) towards information diffusion, Burt [10] describes how social capital, the set of relationships formed by and among individuals in different social contexts [14], can be effectively and efficiently optimized to obtain information and control benefits by exploiting one’s social network position. Burt argues that there is a tradeoff between the number redundant network contacts one has and the novelty of the information in the information diffusion process. Although the more contacts and individual has, the more valuable information he or she can reach and more opportunities he or she will have, however, by increasing one’s network’s size, the cost of maintaining relationships increases, and without and effective diversity, individuals are soon plagued by redundant information. Burt postulates that one can optimize one’s network by efficiently maintaining one’s ties in non redundant contacts such that one is effectively connected to a diverse variety of groups of closely-connected contacts (e.g. a clique), which (the groups) themselves are not connected. The bridging of such holes within the network structure is termed structural holes, which yields information and control benefits. Thus, two network design principles in play here are: Efficiency -maximizing the number of non-redundant contacts to maximize the gains through structural holes, and Effectiveness - the preservation of primary contacts in the network considering also the contact’s diversity principle. As will be seen in section 3, the measure of efficiency incorporates effectiveness as well. 
 2.3 Towards a Social Networks Model for Learning and Performance.
 While most social networks studies in the context of learning have generally been associated with individual and group performance or medium of communication, very few have incorporated learning as an important construct in their model [11, 23, 53]. Furthermore, given the unprecedented advancement in and adoption of social technologies, this study provides much needed evidence in the eLearning domain to help understand how networks interact with technology to foster learning and performance in an era of digital natives [4]. It is anticipated that the theoretical model depicted below based on network and social learning theories would address these research gaps. Therefore, based on the discussion above, the following hypotheses are proposed: H1: Density of an individual’s network is negatively associated with learning H2: Efficiency of an individual’s network is positively associated with learning H3a: The extent to which an individual engages in communication within the network (intra-network communication) is positively associated with learning H3b: The extent to which an individual contributes internally and externally to his group (inter-group communication) is positively associated with learning H3c: Weak ties within an individual’s network is positively associated with learning H4: Learning is positively associated with performance 
 Figure 1: Social Networks Model for Understanding Learning and Performance. 
 3. CONTEXT AND METHODOLOGY.
 In this section, the domain of the study is described, followed by a description of the process of data collection, extraction, storage and analysis using social network measures and attribute data. 
 3.1 The e-Learning Environment.
 The domain for this study is an eLearning environment where an online project management course was delivered during the last semester of 2009 for the Project Management Graduate Program in a leading ‘Group of Eight (Go8)’ university in Australia. Being a postgraduate program that is similar to a MBA, the course was undertaken by 36 full-time working industry professionals ranging from healthcare to banking, information technology and engineering. Students were based locally, nationally as well as overseas. While the online mode of study suited the student cohort relatively well due to their working hours, it required a high level of engagement with the course activities and peers. The course material consisting of lecture, tutorial, laboratory exercises and useful videos is accessible through the university’s eLearning site WebCT in order to support the students’ learning process. In addition, the eLearning platform provides a channel for synchronous communication via chat, and asynchronous communication via group discussion boards. The discussion board is further classified into varying forums including “Public” and “Group” forums (which are private to the group). Within each forum, students can post and reply to messages. Assessments included an individual assignment (15%), one online quiz (10%), one group assignment (25%), and a final exam (50%). For the purpose of this study, group assignment marks were left out of the analysis that the primary focus is on individual learning and performance. Group interactions, however, were considered given that group communications added further insight into an individual’s level of engagement. Groups ranged from two to four members, with 12 groups in total. As the entire learning took place online, analyzing communication structures of such ‘virtual’ groups is another boon given that coordinating and collaborating with team members located in different time zones is one of the challenges of virtual collaboration and one of the capabilities expected to be developed by individuals as part of learning. 
 3.2 Data Collection, Storage and Extraction.
 The main collaborative tool provided for group coordination and collaboration were the discussion forums. As mentioned earlier, there were two kinds of forum. The public forums were focused upon solving general questions about the course, assignments and so on. The private forums, or group forums were created exclusively for internal group coordination and collaboration. Every student had the chance to post messages to the lecturer, other students using the public forum or directly to a group member using the private forums. In total there were 845 messages in the public forum, and a total of 722 across the private forum. Given that the purpose of this study is to model learning and performance of students only, interactions to and from the lecturer were discarded. The information of the messages was extracted directly from the online discussion forums. Due to the unstructured nature of the message logs, a preliminary process of data preparation was executed. After this first step the information was loaded into a MySQL database. Once the data was loaded, a small Java application was written to extract the information required to generate the node data and tie data required for analyzing with UCINet, and Netdraw to generate the network sociograms and statistics [7]. UCINet and Netdraw were chosen over other tools such as Pajek, ORA and Gephi, because of the small nature of the dataset for analysis and it because it remains the most popular tool of choice for many social network analysts. 
 3.3 Message Content Classification.
 As discussed before, given the lack of evidence of measures of social learning using a structural perspective, it is arguable that the main source of information about social learning in virtual teams resides in the richness of their dialogues. A meaningful exchange of dialogue among team members and classmates is instrumental to enhancing their learning process. Thus, to develop a surrogate measure of social learning, for each message in the forums, we analyzed its content in order to identify behavioral patterns and sought to classify such patterns. The classification was based on past research that defined several methods to categorize different types of communication based on specific message features such length [34], channel of dissemination [34, 39], content [34, 38], and meaning [19], among others. In this study, we have defined a classification method based on message content and meaning in order to categorize each message sent in the public and private forums. We term such categories “content richness”. The five categories of content richness, with non-exhaustive descriptions, are: - Empty Message: Inexistent content, file exchange without dialogue, greeting messages. - Team Building Message: Team member personal introductions and very basic coordination. Final group closing activities, congratulations for group achievements and recognition for mutual cooperation. Team building messages support the creation of a sense of common goal and a shared set of beliefs and values. - Dissemination Message: Information about group submissions and notifications about new document versions. Information dissemination is fundamental to keep all team members on track and aware of the status of project activities. - Coordination Message: Team meeting coordination, a very important factor considering the time zone difference issue that some groups have to face. - Collaboration Message: Messages that add value to the group work in terms of knowledge creation. Problem-solving dialogues, different insights about group work issues and project activities. 
 Thus, in terms of content richness, we consider the last category the most significant, however, in terms of social learning all the other categories are also important as indicators of evidence of social learning. Every category was assigned a different weight that represents the content richness of the messages classified in each category (see Table 1). This parameter is considered later to calculate the content richness scores for an individual as explained further below. 
 Table 1: Content categories and their assigned weights, and some examples. 
 3.4 Measures.
 We have adopted an egocentric approach to collect data from the e-learning course social network. Ego networks are formed by a focal node called “ego”, the nodes to which that ego node is directly connected (alters), and the connections or ties among alters [45]. 
 3.4.1 Measures of Network Structure.
 Density: Density D is described as a measure of network cohesiveness and is defined as the relation of the existing number ties to the maximum number of ties possible in a directed graph of n nodes: 
 (FORMULA_1).
 where xij is the value of the connection from i to j. 
 3.4.2 Measures of Network Position.
 Efficiency: Effective size is a measure of the number of alters minus the average degree of the alters within the ego network [10]. The effective size of an ego’s network has been defined as: 
 (FORMULA_2).
 where i is the ego, j is a primary contact, and q is also a primary contact who has strong ties with the ego i (represented by piq) and j (represented by mjq). Efficiency is measured then by dividing the effective size by the number of alters in the ego’s network. 
 3.4.3 Measures of Engagement.
 Contribution Index: Gloor [20] introduces the notion of Contribution Index (CI) to measure the level of participation in social learning settings. The contribution index is defined as: 
 (FORMULA_3).
 where i is the contributor (ego), Σsi is the total of messages sent by i and Σri is the total of messages received by i. The contribution index value can be in a range from -1 to +1. If the learner mostly received messages, then his or her contribution index will be close to -1. On the other hand, if the learner mostly sent messages the contribution index will be close to +1. In terms of social learning we are looking for highly interactive dialogues. A contribution index near to 0 is indicative of a balanced dialogue of the learner with his or her team colleagues. External-Internal Index: Krackhardt and Stern [30] described a measure of interaction for both intra and inter work teams. External-Internal (E-I) index is a measure that compares the number and average strength of external ties to internal ties within different sub-groups in a network. The E-I index has been defined as follows: 
 (FORMULA_4).
 where q is the ego, Σeq represents the total number of external messages sent by q, and Σiq represents the total number of messages sent within the team. Similarly to the contribution index presented before, the E-I index ranges from -1 (only internal group communication) to +1 (indicating interaction only with external contacts rather than with members of the same team). Content Richness Score: As explained above, every message of the dataset was classified according to the level of richness of its content. Each class was assigned with a weight that reflects the meaningfulness of the message in the dialogue. This is a novel contribution of the study - the Content Richness score. Content Richness (CR) is a measure of learning engagement in a dialogic context where the meaningful information exchange among team members drives the individual and group learning process and is thus evidence of learning. The CR score is defined as: 
 (FORMULA_5).
 where q represents the ego, mci represents the message content value of the message i, n is the total number of messages sent by q, and max(mc) is the maximum possible value of message content quality. The CR score range from 0 to 1. If a learner’s CR score is 0 that means that his or her level of contribution richness to the discussions was inexistent. On the other hand, a CR score of 1 means a highly meaningful participation and engagement in course and group discussions. The importance of the CR score for this study is that we hypothesized that the learner’s performance is directly related to his or her level of engagement in a social learning environment, and this metric can help us to determine if there is such relation between these two indicators. 
 3.4.4 Measures of Relationship.
 Average Tie Strength: In keeping with social network literature [36], we used frequency of contact to calculate average tie strength. Therefore, for the purpose of this study, a learner’s tie strength has been measured as the average of all his or her tie strength (frequency of contact) to all other actors in the network. 
 3.4.5 Measures of Performance.
 As stated previously, during the semester the students were assessed on three individual components - individual assignment (15%), online quiz (10%), and final exam (50%). 
 4. RESULTS.
 According to the descriptive statistics obtained (see Table 3), CI is well balanced (CI = .015, tends to zero), which is indicative of an equally distributed rate of messages sent and received. In terms of E-I index, the mean value (E-I = -.872) indicates that there was more internal communication rather than dialogues external to the groups, which was expected given the large number of messages of internal group communication in the dataset. The CR score is quite high (CR = .667) which is indicative of meaningful content exchange within the groups. 
 Table 2: Descriptive Statistics. 
 Pearson’s correlation analysis was used to test the hypotheses (see Table 3 for a detailed description of the correlations). 
 Table 3: Pearson’s Correlation (n=36). 
 In summary, the most significant results are suggesting the following: - Network Structure: There is a significant negative relationship between network density and CR score, r = -.406, p (one-tailed) < 0.01. In terms of social learning, this result makes sense because is better to have a few high level meaningful dialogues, rather than many meaningless conversations. Given this result, we find support for H1. - Network Position: Network efficiency is significantly correlated with CR score, r = .394, p (one-tailed) < 0.01. Highly efficient learners are connected with contacts that are expected to provide good quality of content (high CR), so they can fulfill the informational needs of the learner without having to look for other sources [10]. This result provides us with evidence to support H2. Thus, when a learner has many sources of information, the cost of maintaining those connections increases as well as the level of information redundancy in the network. As a consequence of this, his or her level of network efficiency decreases. Even though theoretically, a decrement in efficiency should affect learner’s performance, the results obtained do not allow us to conclude such phenomena (i.e. no statistically significant relationship between any of the performance variables and efficiency).. - Engagement: There exists a significant positive correlation between CR and CI (r = .344, p (onetailed) < 0.05), thus lending support to H3a. According to the Gloor’s definition of CI [20], an optimal contributor would present a balanced rate of messages sent compared to the number of messages received. Therefore, the CI value should tend to be zero for optimal communication. The conclusion that we can make from this result is that learners with higher CR score send more messages than they receive, and as a consequence, there is no reciprocity in terms of meaningful content exchange for social learning. In addition, CR score is significantly negatively correlated to E-I index, r = -.354, p (one-tailed) < 0.05, thus allowing us to reject H3b. In the case of E-I index we are also looking for a balanced rate of internal and external communication [30]. A high E-I index indicates a relatively higher communication by an individual to those outside his group relative to those internal to his group. This is beneficial for avoiding ‘group think’. According to the results obtained, those who communicate more frequently internally within groups relative to externally outside groups are also engaged in higher or richer levels of communication. This can be attributed to the fact that the large number of internal group messages in comparison to the external ones influences the E-I index. In fact, there were more interactions between group members, rather than among external contacts, which indicates that learning as evidenced by content richness took place within groups rather than outside of groups. This result is very likely due to the large number of internal dialogues. - Network Ties: There is a significant positive relationship between the average strength of ties and CR score, r = .422, p (one-tailed) < 0.01. Therefore, there is sufficient evidence to reject H3c. The stronger the tie the more frequently the contacts occur. This implication means that contacts with high level of interaction tend to mutually exchange valuable information. These dialogues are rich in content and provide more in depth insights about the topics of learning. Although Granovetter’s theory may not hold true in this circumstance, other researchers have claimed that strong ties are symbol of closeness and trust, which are two determinant components for social learning [29, 32]. - Performance: There is a significant positive relationship between CR score and the individual assignment marks, r = .311, as well as between CR score and the quiz mark, r = .341, both p (one-tailed) < 0.05. However the exam result, which has the highest assessment weight in terms of learning outcome, does not seem to be significantly associated with CR score and for none of the engagement measures proposed in this study. Taken altogether, we consider that these results are somewhat indicative enough of how meaningful dialogic exchange among contacts can enhance learners’ performance. Therefore, we find partial support for H4. 
 5. DISCUSSION.
 According to the results obtained after the correlation analysis we can argue that rather than performance, social learning is influenced by social network properties such structure, relations and position. The results overall are also suggestive of the fact that the inherent relationship between social networks and performance is mediated by social learning. Therefore, a better understanding of how individuals organize themselves and interact with others can prove useful to to improve learning programs that directly influence performance. The findings of this study provide further evidence of the importance of social networks in affecting learning. The results are aligned with the arguments presented by Lave and Wenger [32] in their situated learning theory, and with the principles that provide the basis of Siemens’ theory on connectivism [46]. Content Richness (CR) was shown to be a good predictor of social learning due to the interesting findings that connect the measure with most social network characteristics modeled here. It makes sense that an individual with a less dense but more efficient network shows higher levels of engagement when interacting with his or her contacts [10]. At the same time and according to Granovetter [21], although information tends to be diffused through weak ties, meaningful information exchange involves trust and among contacts, which is directly related to the strength of the ties that connect them. In terms of limitations, first of all, as with many other studies on social networks, the size of the dataset raises the concern about the level of representation and generalization of the results. However, given the central limit theorem’s rule of thumb of a minimum of 30 samples and the fact that this study is an exploratory one, although not generalizable to the entire population, the results are indicative of the power of social networks in influencing learning and indirectly, performance. In addition, we acknowledge that the classification method for classifying content richness is still in its early stage, and may be likely to be subject to criticisms. To this end, we believe that the construction of a taxonomy or vocabulary for group communication in studies of linguistics and semantic data mining could allow the automatic identification of significant keywords in a message, and by using this information, the messages could be automatically classified in a predetermined set of categories. Content mining and information retrieval techniques can provide important benefits in this area of analysis. Another limitation of this study is that most of the dialogues analyzed took place within groups, and as a consequence there is not clear evidence of interaction beyond groups. It would be interesting to study the relation between the meanings of internal and external dialogues. However, when group formation is compulsory, according to our results we can state that the level of quality of the dialogues is significant. One important factor that should not be discarded is that group discussion boards are just one channel through which learners interacted during the semester. The messages in the discussion forum may have been followed up through use of other types of communication channels such as chat, videoconferences, emails, face-to-face meetings and phone calls. These interactions, although nice to have for the study, have not been accounted for. In future, a holistic approach that accounts for such interactions can be considered for further research. Finally, one may argue that excluding messages to and from the lecturer is a poor motive because lecturers (teachers) are also members of the learning community and often have the role of the mediator of the group discussions; they also frequently contribute to the building of learning groups/teams and stimulate collaboration among students. While in terms of social learning, this is quite true, however, the reason why the lecturer’s interactions are excluded is because we wanted to model social learning that takes place amongst students only. In reality, it is possible to include the lecturer’s interaction with the student (and vice versa) as well (but exclude the lecturer in computing his/her content richness score) and this remains an area of future work. 
 6. CONCLUSION.
 Although there are many theories that advocate the importance of social interaction in influencing learning and performance, empirical evidence is relatively scant. In this article we presented the development of a theoretical model for understanding the impact of social networks in learning and performance. The novelty of this research is driven by the construction of content-based measure called “content richness” which provides a new approach for measuring the level of engagement of learners in a social learning environment by exchanging meaningful information. We analyzed the communicational patterns of students and groups located in different cities, countries, and time zones. They were part of an online course that relied heavily on using the discussion forums as an important communication tool. The results show that rather than performance, social learning is highly influenced by the learners’ network of contacts. The implications of this study can be understood from a theoretical, methodological and practical standpoint. Although exploratory, this study challenges the theoretical notion of how social networks directly impact performance and questions the existence of antecedents and other confounding variables in the networks-performance equation. Methodologically, as described above, this study offers a novel approach to measure social learning. As an avenue to further this study, it would be useful to run regression models with a larger dataset to test whether networks and performance is significantly mediated by social learning in a single predictive framework. Practically, it is suffice to claim that such a model would allow for educators, professional development leaders, managers and academics to enhance learning analytics and make informed decisions and estimations of learning outcomes for both teaching and learning.