1. INTRODUCTION.
 Social media is described as a web-based service that allows individuals to construct a profile within an organized framework, to generate a list of other users with whom they share a connection, and to navigate their own list of connections and view those made by others within the system [1]. Thus social networks use the Web to facilitate their communications as one element of what has been termed ‘Web 2.0’ - a term coined by O’Reilly [2] and which has come to be used to describe a wide range of Internet-based information and communication technology (ICT) applications that offer the potential for significantly increased interactivity with a high degree of ‘communication, cooperation, collaboration and connection’ [3] between users. More recently attention has turned to how these new applications can be applied to facilitate educational attainment. It is often recognised that a constructivist perspective is most appropriate for understanding learning through social media. Insights on student behaviour and academic performance however are relatively limited in the research literature. Our intention here is to analyse access patterns to a discussion forum within a VLE (virtual learning environment) to determine a taxonomy of online learners. Often, naively, it is assumed that mere participation in an online discussion session – a form of social media – will lead to better learning, and therefore, raised performance. However, it remains to be seen whether social media in itself can aid learning and attainment through participation. Moreover it is a matter of debate what type of access pattern is most conducive to learning. Are relatively short yet frequent sessions involving directed engagement with a discussion forum to obtain a specific objective more productive in learning terms than relatively long yet infrequent sessions intended to develop understanding through exploration and sustained participation? 
 2. ONLINE IDENTITY and COMMUNITY.
 2.1 Learning Theory.
 Social Learning Theory [4] sees environmental (i.e. social) and psychological factors influencing behaviour with ‘retention’ (remembering what one observes), ‘reproduction’ (recreating that behaviour), and ‘motivation’ (having good reason to recreate that behaviour) as critical cognitive aspects. ‘Motivation’ in these terms resonates with the ideas of Whyte [5] who advocated getting students to accept personal responsibility for their own learning, and, as long as the individual has some inherent ability, the result is that better academic progress is made. However some form of guidance or ‘scaffolding’ is required for learners and this needs to be built into the educational infrastructure, or online learning environment. Social Development Theory [6] argues that social interaction precedes intellectual development, with consciousness and cognition being the end product of social behaviour. Thus the connections between people and the sociocultural context in which they interact are critical for such development [7]. Thus Vygotsky challenges the traditional ‘instructionist’ model of learning whereby teachers ‘transmit’ information to students, and offers in its place learning contexts in which students themselves take an active role in enabling their learning. In this analysis of social constructivism, Vygotsky’s Zone of Proximal Development (ZPD) appears to chime to some extent with the Community of Practice (CoP) concept [8] whereby novices firstly undertake learning from a position of ‘Legitimate Peripheral Participation’ (LPP). Lave and Wenger argue that learning is situated such that it is embedded within activity, context and culture. However intentionality is not necessarily assumed in this model of learning and can be an incidental or vicarious outcome of the interactions occurring within a ‘community of practice’. 
 2.2 Empirical Evidence.
 While there are a number of proponents arguing for the use of ‘social media’ as an educative tool, empirical data on their use is not plentiful but is contentious. A study by Heo et al. [9] examining online interaction amongst of a set of students engaged in project-based learning showed that levels of academic achievement do not always reflect the quantity of online interaction, while the quality of interaction is shown to have a critical relationship with academic outcomes. The fact that social media can act as a distraction to learners is attested to by the work of Junco [10] who finds Facebook usage and scholarship to be negatively correlated: the frequency of engagement with Facebook has a negative correlation with the amount of time spent by students preparing for class. In the same vein Junco and Cotten [11] find that students who spend more time chatting online than their peers report greater levels of academic impairment. Such evidence shows social media holding back rather than supporting student learning. This view chimes with Kubey et al. [12] who find that heavy recreational Internet use highly correlated with impaired academic performance. Additionally loneliness, staying up late, tiredness, and failing to attend class also have correlations with self-reports of Internet-caused academic impairment. Such observations prompted further research and hence we wished to investigate student access patterns to an online discussion board and apparent learning approaches. 
 3. METHODOLOGY.
 The investigation took place over two years (2009-2011) on an undergraduate course on Project Management. Students on the course were enrolled on different degree pathways (Marketing and Management) so the class composition included diverse academic interests as well as diverse demographics (e.g. gender, race, age, etc.). Each session ran for one term (from January to April), with class lectures scheduled on a weekly basis. The task given to the student cohort was to form teams of 4-6 people in order to undertake a project assignment which ran from January until mid-March. Students were informed that the group activity did not attract academic credit per se, but was essential for a subsequent activity which did attract credit. This follow-on activity required students on an individual basis to produce short critical accounts reflecting on their team working experience in the first activity. Thus, without sufficient involvement in the group activity, students would find it difficult to complete the reflective account (the second activity). Communications amongst the team members in the group activity were to be conducted through an online discussion application (Blackboard), with instructions given to students to refer to the discussion forum frequently in order to receive updates from the class instructors as well as to raise queries and to read responses. The first year of the study (2009/10) involved 160 active students on the discussion forum, while the second year (2010/11) involved 143 active students. Only those students who submitted the second assignment were considered to be active. Analysis of the data derived from the discussion forum involved a hierarchical cluster analysis to identify subgroups amongst the class, as well as tests of difference amongst groups (t-tests) and tests of association among factors (Pearson correlation). 
 4. RESULTS.
 An initial hierarchical cluster analysis (Ward’s linkage on Euclidean distance) was performed on the data set for each year separately. 
 Year 2010/11. 
 This procedure distinguished several groups on dimensions related to variables extracted from the analytics data: the average interval between online sessions (AIn); and the average duration of an online session (ADu). We see that there are five major groups of students formed when differentiating on the variables introduced above, with the primary differentiator being ADu at a height of h=7.77 (i.e. a considerable difference amongst the two top-level clusters). The top-level clusters consisted of n=87 students with average durations per session of less than 9 minutes, and n=56 students with average duration per session of greater than 9 minutes (the cut-off point of 9 minutes was chosen from the dendogram by visual inspection). The second level clusters were divided on the basis of average interval between sessions. For the group with relatively shorter ADu, a first division at h=6.94 was made, though a subsequent division at h=4.05 serves to better define three distinct clusters. The height of h=4.05 indicates a relatively high distinction amongst clusters. The sizes of the sub-clusters were n=54, n=26 and n=7, divided at average interval per session of 1-5 days, 5-12 days, and more than 12 days respectively. The alternative group with comparatively longer ADu was divided at h=4.01, with cluster sizes of n=41 for 1-5 days, and n=15 for more than 5 days. No further divisions were made due to small height values which could not provide reliable sub-clusters. We can define the five clusters on the basis of their average interval between sessions and the average duration of a session. 
 Cluster 1, n=54: Short interval between sessions and short duration per session. Cluster 2, n=26: Medium interval between sessions and short duration per session. Cluster 3, n=7: Long interval between sessions and short duration per session. Cluster 4, n=41: Short interval between sessions and long duration per session. Cluster 5, n=15: Long interval between sessions and long duration per session. 
 Note that no clear cluster emerged with medium interval between sessions and long duration per session. 
 A test of difference between means (independent samples ttest) confirmed no significant difference between clusters formed on final assignment mark. A one-way ANOVA test was conducted on the three sub-clusters divided at h=4.05 (Levene’s statistic F=.515, p=.599 confirms homogeneity of variance). Results indicate there is a statistically significant difference between groups (F (2.77) = 5.878, p = .004). A Tukey post-hoc test reveals that the final mark attained in the follow-up assignment is statistically significantly higher for average interval per session of between 1 and 5 days (1<AIn<5) (59.9 ± 10.3 percent) compared to 5≤AIn<11 (53.5 ± 11.8 percent, p = .047) and AIn≥11 (46.87 ± 13.2 percent, p = .010). There was no statistically significant difference between clusters 5≤AIn<11 and AIn≥11 (p = .300). Correlation analysis at the level of clusters indicates some interesting associations. Cluster 1: r = -0.387, p=0.01, n=54. Moderate indirect correlation between access span (period between first and last access) and average interval between sessions. Cluster 2: r = 0.462, p=0.05, n=26. Moderate direct correlation between assignment mark and the average number of messages read per session. Cluster 3: r = 0.875, p=0.01, n=7. Strong direct correlation between assignment mark and access span. r = 0.831, p=0.05, n=7. Strong direct correlation between access span and average messages read per session. Cluster 4: n=41. No significant correlations. Cluster 5: r = 0.555, p=0.05, n=15. Moderate direct correlation between average duration of a session and average number of messages read per session. 
 Year 2009/10. 
 The analysis procedure was repeated on the data for year 2009/10. Analysis revealed several groups distinguished on dimensions related to variables extracted from the analytics data: The average interval between online sessions (AIn); average duration of an online session (ADu); and the average number of discussion messages read during an online session (AMr). As with Year 2010/11, we can define five clusters for Year 2009/10 on the basis of their average interval between sessions and the average duration of a session, though the clusters were not as highly distinct as for Year 2010/11. Cut-off height of h=2.09 to achieve five clusters, but top level h=7.77, and as with Year 2010/11, the value of h (incidentally identical) indicates a considerable difference between the two top-level clusters. However, in contrast to Year 2010/11, the division at h=7.77 is based on average interval per session (AIn) rather than average duration per session (ADu). A test of difference between means (independent samples t-test) revealed no significant difference in final assignment mark between clusters. A one-way ANOVA test was conducted on the three sub-clusters divided at h=2.09 (Levene’s statistic F=.975, p=.423 confirms homogeneity of variance). Results indicate there are no statistically significant differences between clusters 1, 2, and 3 on the basis of final assignment marks. Analysis of analytics data over two years has revealed some consistent results, yet there remain a number of issues that the data are unable to resolve. First we should note that student access patterns can be defined using the two parameters of (a) average interval between sessions, and (b) average duration of each session. A number of distinct clusters can be produced using just these two parameters, though their exact inter-relationship is not clear from the analysis. In one year, average interval was the primary differentiator, whereas for the alternative year, average duration was predominant. The more important concern, though, is the composition of clusters along behavioural patterns, and the relationships between dimensions of behaviour and attainment. Commonalities across the two samples point to common behaviour across years on some dimensions. Clusters 1, 3, and 5 are similar over the two studies, though clusters 2 and 4 describe different behaviours. To help with the organisation of the discussion, we introduce a framework composed of labels to distinguish the different types of learners we observed over the two years of the study. This is shown in Figure 1. 
 5. DISCUSSION.
 The application of Weiner's Attribution Theory [13] allows one to make determinations of the reasons (causes) for the observed behaviour of participants. Analytics data provide the observations from which one can draw conclusions about the students' motivations and intentions, given the assumption that their behaviour is deliberate and, for the most part, stable. Thus, the proceeding discussion is premised on the assumption that observed behaviour is indicative of intention, which permits one to make attributions of cause for the observations. Of course, such attributions remain conjecture and unverified, wherein lies a limitation of the work reported here. 
 Figure 1: Learner types based on access behaviour patterns. 
 An important determinant in the area of social learning is the actions of others, which will in some great part impinge on the experience had by a participant, and consequently, help determine their response (i.e. remain online and observe, post messages, engage in a chat, etc.). Attribution to external causes (i.e. other participants) must feature prominently in an analysis of observed behaviour within social media. It should also be remembered that Social Development Theory [6] would place the emphasis on social interaction for individual development, while Bandura's social learning theory would highlight the role of observation as a valuable component of a vicarious approach to learning from others. Evidence of observation is shown in the predominance of message reading over message posting, with many of the learner types choosing to dip into and out of the social artefacts in order to catch-up on things without significant reciprocal contribution. If we accept both views on learning (i.e. ‘social development’ and ‘social learning’) then there is a place for both interaction and observation in a social learning process. However, as we see from our data, preference for one view over the other seems evident. Learner type 3 (‘inquisitive’) and Learner type 7 (‘committed’) are the two groups that demonstrate some level of adherence to the principles of socially-constructed knowledge. For these two groups of learners, attribution of causes for their sustained levels of participation may be due to internal factors, such as innate high levels of determination. Intrinsic motivation assumes an attitude in the participant that places control over attainment within oneself. Self-agency, therefore, is the driving force that determines the extent to which ‘committed’ and ‘inquisitive’ learners expend effort in influencing the group. By contrast, it may be deduced that the remaining learner types are not determined by a strong sense of self-agency within the context of group work, and consequently, tend not to engage in social development which would require active continual interaction with others. At best, the remaining learner types seem to adopt an observer role in efforts to learn vicariously. One should not forget that social learning is not mediated by observation after the fact (i.e. observation of historic activity), but should be contemporaneous with the authentic activity being learned. Thus, reading a trail of messages is not of itself equivalent to participation in the construction process – primarily this is because such an approach is devoid of any affordances for real-time exchanges with the active members of the society being so observed. With respect to the effectiveness of such illegitimate social learning, an important consideration is cognitive loading [14], which may impact on the observer's ability to comprehend the considerable amount of accumulated knowledge in the form of dozens or even hundreds of message exchanges. Reading alone does not translate into learning, particularly in an electronically-created social environment that is far removed from the realities of face-to-face team exchanges with their informationally-rich cues (e.g. sounds, locations, visual and aural perceptions, etc.). Without the combination of multimodal sensory inputs, textually-based communications lack the potential for yielding contextually-rich integrated knowledge that are conveyed through visual and auditory channels. Thus social learning conducted through a discussion board format consisting of historic collections of message exchanges fails to live up to the expectations and demands of an authentic social learning experience in which learners are able to observe the visual as well as the verbal cues of their peers (and experts), to process those cues progressively without overloading their cognitive capacities, and to re-affirm their understanding through expression and feedback. Although one may be able to recreate a ‘community’ in a social media environment, production of an authentic ‘practice’ is more problematic. Progression within the community of practice is hard to facilitate therefore without continual authentic exchanges intended to share experiences. Those learners who merely ‘visit’ the community to observe would rarely be considered to be participating in the practice, and therefore, could not expect to benefit from the ‘social’ nature of the media. Whatever may be the drawbacks of an electronically-mediated forum, learning can be an incidental product of participation in online discussion, as evidenced by the ‘committed’ learner type (Figure 1). While their academic attainment did not noticeably improve, the strengthening of their social ties and their acceptance by the community as a valuable member of the network are, arguably, important consequences of efforts to ‘enter’ the community through sustained contributions. Whether the behaviour of the ‘purposive’, ‘directed’, ‘strategic’, ‘detached’, and ‘apathetic’ learner types can be explained by their preference for an ‘asocial’ approach to their personal learning, or as being due to other moderating factors such as introverted personalities, insufficient time, social reticence, low level of motivation, non-acceptance in the community, or any other form of ‘action by others’, is not clear from the data. What we do learn is that any attempt to interpret behaviour patterns from analytics data alone is fraught with vagaries that offer multiple competing explanations and which lack adequate support. 
 7. CONCLUSION.
 The study reported on here notes results that point to discernible VLE access patterns, with interpretations of the intentions and motivations of learners of several types. From this analysis a framework is presented that identifies and relates seven types of learners on the dimensions of access span and access duration. The framework recognises that the learner types lie on a two-dimensional spectrum that extends from purely instructivist to fully constructivist at opposite extremes. In reality, all learners lie in between the extremes and demonstrate aspects of both learning approaches. The VLE permits social interaction but interchange amongst participants alone is inadequate as a means of raising performance levels. Improvements in attainment are not clearly determined by behaviour patterns, and intrinsic motivators are perhaps the reason for variations in these patterns. It would appear that few students appreciated the relationship between participation and attainment, which in retrospect proved prescient on their part. In a context devoid of adequate extrinsic motivators, emphasis must be on nurturing intrinsic motivation in order to encourage more active participation where the pedagogic goal is experience of the process of social construction through interaction rather than knowledge of the artefacts thus produced. It should be noted that the results are preliminary in nature and must be considered indicative rather than substantive. Further work should include the development of research instruments to test for the substantive nature of the learner types, and to determine the consequence of each type for learner attainment, group cohesion and the viability of a social media-based learning environment.