1. Statistics of students’ performance on pretest. 
 Table 2. Statistics of students’ performance on posttest. 
 2.2 Approach.
 2.2.1 Introducing learning decomposition.
 Beck [2] introduced the idea of learning decomposition that extends the classic exponential learning curve by taking into account the heterogeneity of different learning opportunities for a single skill. The standard form of exponential learning curve can be seen in Equation 1. In this model, parameter A represents students’ performance on the first trial; e is the numerical constant (2.718); parameter b represents the learning rate of a skill, and t is the number of practice opportunities the learner has at the skill. 
 Equation 1. Standard exponential learning curve model. 
 Equation 2. Learning decomposition model. 
 The model as shown in Equation 1 does not differentiate different types of practice, but just counts up the total number of previous opportunities. In order to investigate the difference two types of practice (I and II), the learning opportunities are “decomposed” into two parts in the model in Equation 2 in which two new variables t1 and t2 are introduced in replace of t, and t = t1 + t21. t1 represents the number of previous practice opportunities at one type I; and t2 represents the number of previous opportunities of type II. The new parameter B characterizes the relative impact of type I trials compared to type II trials.  The estimated value of B indicates how many trials that one practice of type I is worth relative to that of type II. For example, a B value of 2 would mean that practice of type I is twice as valuable as one practice of type II, while a B value of .5 indicates a practice of type I is half as effective as a practice of type II. The basic idea of learning decomposition is to find an estimate of weight B that renders the best fitting learning curve. Equation 2 factors the learning opportunities into two types, but the decomposition technique can generalize to n types of trials by replacing t with B1*t1 + B2*t2 + … + tn. Thus, parameter Bi represents the impact of a type i trial relative to the “baseline” type n. 
 2.2.2 Decomposing learning opportunities.
 Now that we have described the model of learning decomposition, we want to “decompose” students’ learning opportunities in our data set in order to fit such a model. Various metrics can be used as an outcome measurement of student performance. For instance, Beck [4] chose to model student’s reading time since it is a continuous variable. Although one may argue for other indicators, e.g. students’ help requests and response times, we simply choose to use the correctness of student’s first attempt to a problem as an outcome measure of their performance. A “1” in the data indicates the student got a problem correctly on the first attempt, and thus proceeded to the next problem without getting any instructional assistance, while a “0” means he failed on the first try and received certain type of tutoring from the system, depending on which condition the student has been assigned into. When it comes to a nominal variable, in our case, dichotomous (0/1) response data, a logistic model should be used. Now learned performance, (i.e. performance in Equation 2), is reflected by odds ratio of success to failure. Equation 3 represents a logistic regression model for learning decomposition. Where α, γ are the new representation of students’ initial knowledge and their learning rates of a skill on the logistic scale. Now that we have determined our outcome variable and functional form of the model, all that remains is to decompose learning opportunities into components. We split student trials into four groups largely on the basis of experimental condition as below. Therefore, the number n is equal to 4 in this analysis. • hint_wrong_trial (th) indicates the number of prior wrong trials that a student in the hint condition had encountered • scaffold_wrong_trial (ts) counts the number of prior wrong trials that a student in the scaffold condition had made before. • delayed_wrong_trial (td) is similar to the other two variables but for students in the delayed condition. However, it is specially calculated such that the prior encounters will not increase until the student was presented the explanations for all the problems in order to address the fact that the learning actually happened at the moment when the explanations were shown. Note that by doing so we assume that simple exposure to the content does not cause learning. It is also worth pointing out that although the approach of learning decomposition itself does not require the administration of pretests and posttests, in this particular analysis, we do need the results of posttest to be able to detect the impact of explanations (in the delayed feedback condition) on student learning. • Others (to). Because what we really care about is the relative effectiveness of the different tutoring interventions during the experiment, we did not differentiate students’ practice trials on pretest, posttest and trials where they gave a correct answer to the experiment problem. Instead, all these trials are combined together into the group others. Actually, since the number trials on pretest and posttest are the same for all students, it is the correct trial on experiment problems that matter in this group. For those readers who are familiar with ASSISTments vocabulary, it is also worth pointing out that although in the experiment there are three versions of the experiment problems with different associated interventions, one for each condition, we created one unified problem ID for all the three versions, since the main questions are the same. 
 Table 3. Decomposed response data of student A. 
 Table 3 shows a sequence of time-ordered trials of a student who was assigned in the scaffolding condition. The student finishes all three sections, fails on one of the pretest problems, but learns to solve the problem during the experiment as suggested by a correct answer to the same problem in the posttest. The right part of Table 3 shows the corresponding data after the trials are decomposed into component parts. Since the student is in the scaffolding condition, all values in the hint_wrong_trial and delayed_wrong_trial are zero. He solves the first encountered experiment problem wrong (row 3), which cause an increase on the value of scaffold_wrong_trial from zero to 1 ( row 4). Again, he gets the third experiment problem wrong (row 5), and then the value of scaffold_wrong_trial increases from 1 to 2 in row 6. The value of trial for others just increases by one whenever a pretest problem, a posttest problem or a correct trial was encountered. For instance, the student answers the second encountered experiment problem correct (row 4), and thus the value of others increased by 1 (row 5). Limited by space, we only demonstrate the decomposition process for a student in the scaffold condition; the process for the hint condition would be identical.  For the delayed feedback condition, since the student would not see the feedback until after all of the experimental trials, it is necessary to model that differently. In the delayed condition, the number of delayed-wrong trials would stay as zero until it jumps to be 2 in row 7, since the student would have seen the two explanations after finishing the experimental questions. This problem requires a rather novel use of learning decomposition, and some care in accounting for when the learning opportunities actually occur. 
 2.3 Results.
 We fit the model shown in Equation 3 to the decomposed data in the statistics software package R (see www.r-project.org). To account for variance among students and items, student IDs and unified problem IDs are also introduced as factors. By taking this step we account the fact that student responses are not independent of each other, and properly compute statistical reliability and standard errors. Also, by fitting our model in this manner we do not suffer the scaling problems mentioned by [10] since all three conditions have the same intercept (i.e. A parameter).  After the model is fitted, it outputs estimated coefficients for every condition, as shown in Table 4. The result suggests that the delayed feedback, estimated coefficient being 0.720, is more effective at helping student learn the skill than the other two conditions, esp. the scaffolding condition for which the coefficient estimate is 0.633. In prior work with this experiment [14], the authors reported that they did not find any main effect. It is possible to use the estimated coefficients (B) and standard errors in Table 4 to perform a statistical z-test, as we did in [7]. However, there is a bit of serendipity: the first author was conducting some exploratory analyses using resampling to see how stable the parameter estimates really were. It appeared that there was little overlap between the estimates for the scaffold and delayed conditions. Therefore, we decide to test this approach formally using bootstrapping [5] and randomization tests [6]. 
 Table 4. Coefficients of logistic learning decomposition model. 
 Bootstrapping is a modern, computer-intensive, general purpose approach to statistical inference, falling within a broader class of resampling methods [5]. It involves the construction of a number of resamples of the observed dataset by random sampling with replacement from the original data set; and each resample is independent (conditioned on the original sample) and identically distributed. Although bootstrapping was developed as techniques for parameter estimation, it can be used for hypothesis testing as well. In general, first we make a null hypothesis. Then we draw repeated samples from the original data set under the condition that the null hypothesis is true, and then we reject the null hypothesis if the statistic computed from the observed dataset is unlikely under the null hypothesis, or otherwise retain the null. In this particular analysis, the hypothesis we would like to test is “The delayed feedback strategy promotes learning more or less effectively than the scaffold (or hint) strategy.” Correspondingly, the null hypothesis would be “There is no difference on learning promotion between the delayed and scaffolding strategies.” Specifically, we follow the following steps to test our hypothesis. Step 1: Decide on a metric to measure the relative effectiveness between delayed feedback and scaffolding strategies. For this example, we choose the difference between the estimated coefficients of Delayed_wrong_trial and Scaffold_wrong_trial. Step 2: Calculate the metric on the original data. The results in Table 3 provides B(Delayed_wrong_trial) – B(Scaffold_wrong_trial), equal to .087. Step 3:  Bootstrap the original data with randomization to construct samples where the null hypothesis is true Repeat N times { Repeat M times (M =  the number of students in our original data set) { Sample data of one student (with replacement) from the original data; Randomly allocate the student into one of the three conditions: delayed, scaffold, or hint by changing the “Condition” label of each data point Re-compute the number of prior trials for the student according to the newly assigned condition; } Train logistic learning decomposition model on the re-sampled data, and record B(Delayed_wrong_trial) – B(Scaffold_wrong_trial) ; } In our case, we pick the repeated times N to be 500, and M is 300 as there are 300 students in our data set. Step 4: Check how likely our original result is under the null hypothesis, and reject or retain the null hypothesis. After the bootstrapping process, we obtain a list of difference between Delayed_wrong_trial and Scaffold_wrong_trial, totally 501 cases including our original result. Then we rank the list descending, and found that the original result was at the 95 percentile, the 25th in the ranking order, which suggests that the probability of the original result has a probability of less than 5%.  Although it is tempting to think we have p < 0.05, this methodology is actually conducting a one-tailed test.  Thus, the two-tailed value is p = 0.1.  Therefore, we have a marginally reliable result that delayed feedback is better than scaffold + hint, and giving students delayed feedback seems causing more learning than requesting them to finish a series of scaffolding questions. To complete the story, we repeat the same process compare the other two pairs: delayed vs. hint conditions, and scaffold vs. hint conditions, but find that they are comparable to each other at helping students learning the math skill in ASSISTments. 
 3 Conclusion.
 This paper explored the research question of measuring the instructional effectiveness of different tutoring interventions, using the learning decomposition technique. We found that presenting students with delayed feedback works better than breaking problems into scaffolding questions. We also used bootstrapping with randomization to test the statistical reliability of the finding. Typically, there are two reasons for the usage of learning decomposition (or any educational data mining technique).  The first is repurposing a previous experiment’s data to answer a new question.  The second is using EDM techniques to “zoom in” and detecting subtle effects that previous approaches failed to report. Previous works on learning decomposition [3, 4, 16] have been focusing on the first reason, while in this paper we focus on the second reason through an item level analysis and bootstrapping. One open question is why bootstrapping plus randomization gives different results than the parametric method of using estimated coefficients and standard errors to derive an analytic p-value. We did a z-test using estimated coefficients and standard errors given in Table 4 and obtained p = .4. Typically computationally intensive techniques are less powerful than parametric ones, unless one or more of the parametric tests’ assumptions have been violated. We are not sure where the problem lies, but suggest caution in interpreting standard error terms from logistic regression models using learning decomposition. The contribution of the paper lies in three aspects. First, we found that there is a main effect in a randomized controlled study that delayed feedback tutoring strategy is more effective than giving students scaffolding questions in ASSISTments. While previous analysis using ANOVA failed to detect such an effect, we were able to do so by conducting an item level analysis using EDM techniques. Second, we showed how learning decomposition can be applied in the domain of mathematics to use observational data to estimate the effectiveness of different tutoring strategies. It provides evidence that the learning decomposition is not domain specific. This simple, low cost approach is generally applicable to a variety of ITS that focus on different domains for identifying variances in educational effectiveness of interventions. Also, our use of learning decomposition is novel in that we are careful to consider when various aspects of an intervention occur, and do not give credit for a learning opportunity that has not yet happened (the delayed-wrong condition). Third, the process described in this paper serves as a demonstration of how bootstrapping approach and randomization tests can be employed in the educational data mining field. 
 Acknowledgements.
 This research was made possible by the U.S. Department of Education, Institute of Education Science (IES) grants #R305K03140 and #R305A070440, the Office of Naval Research grant # N00014-03-1-0221, NSF CAREER award to Neil Heffernan, and the Spencer Foundation. All the opinions, findings, and conclusions expressed in this article are those of the authors, and do not reflect the views of any of the funders.